'Order with promo' chapter (#50)
melange-re/melange-for-react-devs: docs/order-with-promo/index.md

# Order with Promo

Now that you have a `Promo` component, you can add it to your `Order` component.
With that in place, customers can finally enter promo codes and enjoy discounts
on their orders.

## Add `discount` type

> But first, let's see how to create an explicit (normal) variant type for the

Reviewer: What's "explicit (normal)"? I understand "normal" variants, but I find the mix of both "explicit" and "normal" a bit confusing. 

Are polyvars "implicit"?

Author: I agree this is confusing. What I was trying to convey was that with normal variants, you must explicitly define the type. Rephrased this paragraph in: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/7ecb9eaa5a42e9d5a57589db15960e6cfd0f998e

`discount` reactive value inside `Promo`. We do so not because we have to, but
because it will give us some more insight into OCaml's type system.

When we hover over the `discount` variable, we see this:

<<< Types.re#inferred-type

The easiest thing to do is to create a new `discount` type and assign it to that

> type expression, then delete the `` ` `` from the variant tags to turn them into

Reviewer: delete the `` ` `` ~and the `[>`, `]` wrappers as well (not sure if worth mentioning).~ Edit: never mind, i see the instructions continue below to remove the `>`.

variant constructors[^1]:

<<< Types.re#bad-discount-type

However, this results in a compilation error:

```text
Error: A type variable is unbound in this type declaration.
       In case
         DiscountError of ([> `MissingSandwichTypes
                            | `NeedMegaBurger
                            | `NeedOneBurger
                            | `NeedTwoBurgers ]
                           as 'a) the variable 'a is unbound
```

We'll come back to this error message later. For now, observe that the error
disappears if we simply delete `>`:

<<< Types.re#delete-refinement

This fixes the syntax error so that we now have a correctly-defined variant
type.

## Refactor `discount`

Refactor the `discount` reactive value to use our new variant type by deleting
all instances of `` ` ``:

<<< Promo.re#discount-variant

You can likewise refactor the switch expression inside the render logic:

<<< Promo.re#discount-render

## Type constructor and type variable

Change the `discount` type to this:

<<< Types.re#type-variable

Now `discount` is a *type constructor* that takes a *type variable* named `'a`.

> A type constructor is not a fixed type---you can think of it as function that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A type constructor is not a fixed type---you can think of it as a function that
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/e40744328f952cb052000a7c3fa46db27ee30d9c

The advantage of doing this is that the variant tags inside `DiscountError` are
no longer constrained by our `discount` type. This makes sense because they are
used primarily in the `Discount` module, and if any variant tags are renamed,
added, or deleted, it will happen in there.

Using a type variable does not sacrifice type safety, if you hover over the
`discount` variable, you see that its type is:

```reason
discount([> `MissingSandwichTypes
          | `NeedMegaBurger
          | `NeedOneBurger
          | `NeedTwoBurgers ])
```

OCaml can figure out the type of `discount` from its usage.

## `>` = "allow more than"

Once again, we see `>` in an inferred type, so let's see what it means. In
polymorphic variant type expressions, it means "allow more than". In this case,
it means that tags other than the four that are listed are allowed. For example,
this type would be allowed:

```reason{5-6}
discount([| `MissingSandwichTypes
          | `NeedMegaBurger
          | `NeedOneBurger
          | `NeedTwoBurgers
          | `HoneyButter
          | `KewpieMayo ])
```

Generally, you won't need to use `>` in your own type definitions, but it often

> appears when the compiler is infers the type of a variable or function that uses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
appears when the compiler infers the type of a variable or function that uses
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/e40744328f952cb052000a7c3fa46db27ee30d9c

> polymorphic variants.

Reviewer: Do you think we should mention that "closed polyvars" (polyvars without `>`) are roughly equivalent to regular variants?

Author: Added a tip about equivalence of fixed polymorphic variants and normal variants in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/407d00097197a8f12de648ade524ce8a6039a240

## Implicit type variable

Let's come back to the question of why the original attempt at a type definition
is syntactically invalid:

<<< Types.re#bad-discount-type

The reason is that there's an implicit type variable around the `>`. So the
above code is equivalent to this:

<<< Types.re#explicit-type-var{14}

Now the error message makes a bit more sense:

> Error: A type variable is unbound in this type declaration.

The type variable exists, but it doesn't appear as an argument of the `discount`
type constructor. Once it's added, it compiles:

<<< Types.re#add-type-arg{1}

> This is somewhat like accidentally using a variable in a function but forgetting

Reviewer: This is a nice metaphor 👍

to add that variable to the function's argument list.

## Normal variants vs polymorphic variants

Actually, we are not ready to settle the debate of when to use normal variants
and when to use polymorphic variants, because polymorphic variants have features

> that we have yet to explore. But in the case of the `discount` reactive value,

Reviewer: what is a "reactive value"?

Author: Oops, this is mistake caused by an erroneous reading of the React documentation: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/issues/51

Renamed all occurrences of "reactive value" back to "derived variable" in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/e097107a84569dd1ef6249c5a388f77fa8de8ab4

we can say that either would be fine. Still, the version using normal variants
is a little more explicit and self-documenting, which is never a bad thing.

## Force `DiscountError` argument to be polymorphic variant

Right now the argument of the `DiscountError` constructor can be any type at

> all, but we can force it to be polymorphic constructor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all, but we can force it to be a polymorphic constructor:
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/commit/7ecb9eaa5a42e9d5a57589db15960e6cfd0f998e

<<< Types.re#must-be-poly{4}

The `[> ]` type expression means a polymorphic variant that has no tags, but
allows more tags, which basically means any polymorphic variant.

## Add `DateInput` component

> To see different promotions in action, we want to be able to easily change the

Reviewer: This jump is a bit confusing for me as a reader. The last sentence of the previous section ends with adding `[> ]`, but it doesn't explain why `[> ]` is helpful (I don't understand why 😅 I had never seen a polyvar used like this). Nor it helps with a transition to the next section, which seems back to the actual building and less about "theory".

Maybe adding the "why" and some transitioning text ("let's leave behind the theory and back to the implementation..") would help?

Author: I added a mid-chapter summary in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/577c21cdcbc991c086ab6f47c3e5237e9a8a7c7c. But it will become the chapter summary after I split this chapter in half.

Author: > but it doesn't explain why [> ] is helpful (I don't understand why 😅 I had never seen a polyvar used like this).

I added an explanation for this in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/f6964dec7944aee66945e8c6bb8e281f5a2e7331. It's arguably not all that useful in real life, but I thought it was a little useful and hope that it solidifies the reader's intuition about `>`.

Also, in the commit above I updated the mid-chapter summary a little bit.

process, add our newly-created `DateInput` component:

<<< Demo.re#initial{16-17,21}

Change `Index` to use the new `Demo` component:

<<< Index.re{7}

## Add `Promo` to `Order`

Add the `Promo` component to the `Order` component:

<<< Order.re#make{3,22-25,28}

A breakdown:

- Create a new state variable called `discount`
- Set the value of `discount` through `Promo`'s `onApply` callback prop (we'll
  add this prop in the next step)
- Subtract `discount` from `subtotal` when rendering the total price of the
  order

## Add `onApply` prop to `Promo`

Add an `onApply` prop to `Promo`, which will be invoked when a promo code is
successfully submitted and results in a discount:

<<< Promo.re#add-on-apply{3}

::: tip

You don't have to type annotate your component props, but it's a good idea to at
least type annotate your component's callback props as a form of documentation.

:::

## Add `React.useEffect1`

To invoke `onApply`, we can add a `useEffect` hook that invokes `onApply` when
`discount` has a value of the form `` `Discount(value) ``:

<<< Promo.re#use-effect

Note that when `discount` has an error value, we return `()` from the switch

> expression, which is essentially a no-op.

Reviewer: Have we introduced unit before? Otherwise, this is a good chance to point to https://ocaml.org/docs/basic-data-types#unit.

Author: Great link! Added it in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/1ec3f75ba76a17973f4e40d79c80a8baaca10668.

I actually did cover unit before here: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/blob/7a48ad29ea99776d10258f8a9dc512aacd0d8a01/docs/styling-with-css/index.md?plain=1#L152. But I think I like your link better than the [ReasonML explanation](https://reasonml.github.io/docs/en/overview#unit), maybe I should just change it there too?

## `useEffect*` functions

> `React.useEffect1` is a one of the binding functions for React's [useEffect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`React.useEffect1` is one of the binding functions for React's [useEffect
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/e40744328f952cb052000a7c3fa46db27ee30d9c

hook](https://react.dev/reference/react/useEffect). The number `1` at the end of
the function indicates how many dependencies this function is supposed to take.
Accordingly, we also have `React.useEffect0`, `React.useEffect2`, etc, all the
way up to `React.useEffect7`[^2].

All `React.useEffect*` functions accept a [setup
callback](https://react.dev/reference/react/useEffect#reference) as their first
argument, the type of which is:

```reason
unit => option(unit => unit)
```

The setup callback's return type is `option(unit => unit)`, which allows you to

> return a cleanup function encased in `Some`. When you don't need to return a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
return a cleanup function encased in `Some`. When the effect doesn't need a
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/e40744328f952cb052000a7c3fa46db27ee30d9c

## Add styling for promo code row

Execute `npm run serve` to see your app in action. Verify that it behaves as
expected:

- Type "FREE" into the input and press Enter. It should deduct the price of
  every other burger (ordered by price descending).
- Type "HALF" into the input and press Enter. It should deduct half off the
  entire order.
- Change the date to something other than May 28. It should show an error saying
  "Expired promo code"

However, the styling is a little bit off. Add the following value to
`Order.Style`:

<<< Order.re#promo-class

Then set the `className` of the promo code row to `Style.promo`:

<<< Order.re#set-promo-class{1}

## How often does the Effect run?

Everything seems to be working correctly, but let's see how often our
`useEffect` hook fires by adding a little logging:

<<< Promo.re#log{8}

You see that every time a promo code is successfully applied, it logs twice to
the console. That doesn't seem right, because the value of `discount` only
changes once when you submit a new promo code.

The reason lies in the runtime representation of `discount`---recall that
variant constructors with arguments are turned into objects in the JS runtime.

> Because `discount` is a reactive value, it gets recreated on every render, and

Reviewer: The solution for this would be to create the values in `discount` using `useMemo`. So if the `submittedCode` is the same, then the generated `CodeError(error)` is also the same. (Not sure if worth mentioning).

Author: Makes sense, but since the conclusion in this chapter is that useEffect isn't needed, I'll save a mention of useMemo for a future chapter where it's legitimately needed

    variable
  - You rarely need to use `>` in your own type definitions, but it often
    appears in inferred types (that appear when you hover over variables and
    functions)
- Some component props have names that aren't legal as function arguments in
  OCaml, and we must add an underscore after them. A common example is `type`,
  which must be rewritten as `type_`.
- ReasonReact has several binding functions for React's useEffect hook, e.g.
  `React.useEffect0`, `React.useEffect1`, etc
  - The number at the end indicates how many dependencies the function takes
  - `React.useEffect1` takes an array for its one dependency
  - `React.useEffect2` and above take tuples for their dependencies
- The elements of a tuple can be different types
- Tuples become arrays in the JavaScript runtime
- The elements of an array must all be the same type
- Be careful about using variants as hook dependencies, because they often get
  turned into objects in the runtime and cause Effects to run more often than
  you want
- It's often safe to use `option` as a hook dependency, because even though it's
  a variant, it's a special case and does not become an object in the JavaScript
  runtime

> - You can use `let` inside expressions, which allows you define variables closer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can use `let` inside expressions, which allows you to define variables closer
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/50/commits/e40744328f952cb052000a7c3fa46db27ee30d9c
